A Sonification of Pembroke's Industrial Past

My project explores the relationship between sound and memory through the industrial past of Pembroke, Ontario. The project hosted at pembrokesoundscapes.ca, is an online interactive map of Pembroke. Important locations on my map like factories, mills, and lumber yards, contain nodes with playable sounds of the industrial soundscape. This project is as much a meditation on open access as it is a historical soundscape. This is a public history project that was created as a study of open access in the humanities. I challenge critical ideas about open access and discuss the ways I navigated this difficult terrain. Because as much as task is entangled in the Pembroke historical landscape, my task of navigating open access is built into the map that represents that taskscape. By confronting issues of open access I discuss the tools and workflow I used to 'hack' open access.
Open source means sharing all the source code files of a project online. This does not just include code, but sound recordings, notes on process, images, etc. Open Access means permitting anyone with a connection and a link to files to view, copy, and/or change those files for their own use. The two terms are often used interchangeably. Accessibility is the most important aspect to this public history project. I use GitHub, an open, online version control repository to keep this project open source/access. It is thus essential to understand that the two terms are entangled because however open source I make this project, it is not neccesarily accessible. I could push my ontological limits and lay bare everything about this project. But who is to say that the project is then openly accessible. Open source implies accessiblity, but only to a certain extent. For instance, entangled with the website both explictly and implictly are my attempts towards an open access project. The National Film Board footage used in the home page video contain watermarks and timestamps. That is the result of a free download. Clean footage is a paid-for service which would have cost $18 per second of footage. I kept the marked-up footage both for practical use and because it is a subtle reminder of the limits of open access: it may be free to use, but its use is limited.
When discussing the public in this project, I assume that 'the public' as a unified whole other than me does not exist. Rather, public is a place word for a myriad of fluid, intersectional communities that are neither cohesive nor necessarily aware of their place . The stakeholders in this project that I consulted consist of relatives, a popular Pembroke Facebook group I'm from Pembroke Ontario, and I'm not ashamed to admit it on Facebook, and local Pembroke historians and residents. I must also consider the potential that this project becomes a pedagogical tool. Public historians must anticipate potential and unknown stakeholders.
I am not only digitally and academically a part of the public in this public history project, but even historically. I am not one of the workers or residents of Pembroke, but my family has historical and contemporary connections to Pembroke and the Ottawa Valley. In fact, this project was inspired by familial ties. My ancestor, Edward Arunah Dunlop founded several businesses. In fact, E.A. Dunlop is praised in Pembroke for establishing the town's industry.
What is Sound?

This may be a strange question to ask. After all, sound is all around us. We know it intuitively. Sound is noise is sound is noise is sound... It is a phenomenon resulting from the movement of objects. Sound is vibration. It is a wave. We have an intuitive understanding of sound, if not one invoking some sort of scientific explanation.
I am careful here not to defer to a scientific understanding of sound. Mark Grimshaw and Tom Garner argue that the scientific or "acoustic definition" of sound states that sound is a wave. But this definition makes no room for the experience of sound. "It eschews the ambiguity that arises through individual cognition and perception, the personalization of sound that is part of our hearing experience."3 Sound is sufficiently embodied. It arises from a source and we experience it. Grimshaw and Garner exam sound as an emergent phenomenom starting in the auditory cortex. Sterne pushes for a sound studies that challenges our understanding of sound through scientific approaches that examine decibel levels and the biology of human ears. These approaches also limit our understanding of sound to a 'heard noise', pushing ableist rhetoric that deaf people cannot experience sound in any way. Rather, Sterne argues, our understanding of sound is as entangled in history as sound itself. We must recognize that any understanding of sound, any theory, cultural approach, or research method is entirely historical.
The film theorist Michael Chion identifies several ways we listen. Casual listening allows us to gather information about something (the most common); identify voices, for instance. Sounds have multiple sources [49]. Semantic Listening is listening for understanding; like reading is to a writing text. Reduced listening abstracts context and takes the sound itself as object.[50] In reduced listening, we identify pitch (an inherent characteristic of sound.[51] Chion’s categorization of listening is important because it allows us to think about the different ways we listen. In other words, the act of listening changes depending on the context of our situation. We should be careful not to give too much credence to Chion's categorization since it detracts from exploring the experience of listening. I cannot provide a definition of sound. You know what sound is - it encompasses your experience. At best I you can imagine sound as a sphere that surrounds you. Like visuality, it is a complex human experience.
Perhaps a better question to ask is what is it like to experience sound? We can begin with a simple dichotomy between hearing and listening: to hear is to receive sensory input from noises in the world around us; to listen is to ascribe meaning to noise as sound. This dichotomy obviously expands into a metaphor for historical method. Sound is an understudied field since historians tend to focus on the visual over sound. One could argue that historians merely hear the past without actually listening. (Metaphors of deafness are demeaning, ableist, and lack a complex understanding of sound as an experienced and embodied phenomenon.) Historical theory is imbued with visual tropes, namely the gaze. Yet we have no entrenched explanations for sound (nor smell for that matter).
Phenomenology

I propose a phenomenological approach to sound studies. Scholars from the philosopher Don Ihde, the anthropologist Tim Ingold, and archeologists Ian Hodder, and Stuart Eve use phenomenlogical approaches in their research. Phenomenology is the philosophical approach to consciousness as experienced in the 'first-person'. Phenomenologists thus do not get caught up in the mind-body debate over how and where consciousness occurs. They do not study what experience is made of, but the nature of experience.
I believe that phenomenology is an honest field of study since it acknowledges experience as the only reality we have in life - everything is interpreted through experience. But, like most approaches, including 'the digital', historians have been much less accepting of phenomenology as archaeologists or anthropologists. Maybe this is because historians are uncomfortable with what Eve states is the phenomenologist's charge: recreating the past in the present since he is the I. 'They' - the past people we study - are rarely situated in an active tense. Granted, archaeologists also study ancient spaces with little evidence and record for interpretation. They have a history of using technology to search for and recreate sites and thus have a more intimate connection with digital tools. Perhaps they inhabit a more comfortable position exploring the past since their subjects are long dead. Archaeologists can thus use phenomenology to try to understand past experience: we cannot know what 'they' thought at all, but we can at least try to "acknowledge the possibilities" of human experience.[12-13] However, I do not believe historians are uncomfortable with doing this whatsoever - all we do is tell stories about 'they' as interpreted through 'I'. Rather, historians traditionally tend to dance around that fact to legitimize their work. If it is 'I' that this story is mostly about, then the story about 'they' cannot be that true.
Phenomenology, then, does not just effect the way we listen, but influences how we do pubic history work with living subjects. When we do not interact with our immediate stakeholders, using the phenomenological approach, our publics are imagined. We physically interact with an significantly small public than the ones who actually explore our work. It follows that much like marketing, public history involves anticipating stakeholders based on the context of a project and the current publics involved. People are stakeholders even if they do not know it.
Phenomenology should not be a rigorous ideology we hold ourselves to but a recognition of our limitations of 'recreating' the past, and affordances toward 'representing' the past. Because like experience, the past is fluid and shifting. Phenomenology allows us to experiment with ideas in real time. To be a phenomenologist is to be attentive to the world around you. Because that world is not only shaped through your experience, but that world shapes your experience.
What is a Soundscape?

While the field of sound studies is over a century old, modern sound studies began with R Murray Schafer's iconic 1977 book The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the Tuning of the World. Schafer defined the soundscape as .
It is easy to trace the historicity of Schafer's soundscapes. Schafer develope his practice in the 1970s, when concern grew over humans polluting and negatively impacting the environment. Schafer focused on noise poullution and critiqued urban Lo-fi soundscapes for their abundance of noise. The cacophony, Schafer thought, obscured our attention to specific noises and left us unable to fully listen to our environments. The field of sound studies has since critiqued Schafer's approach to soundscapes. Even Schafer's contemporaries disagreed with him. The philosopher Don Idhe prophetically tempered Schafer in the opening of his 1976 philosophical work Listening and Voice.
It is not merely that the world has suddenly become noisier or that we can hear farther, or even that sound is somehow demandingly pervasive in a technological culture. It is rather that by living with electronic instruments our experience of listening itself is being transformed, and included in this transformation are the ideas we have about the world and ourselves.1
It is unfortunate Ihde's work was not as popular amongst sound researchers as Schafer's book published just a year later, because Ihde's words were not recognized in sound studies until the past decade. Digital platforms do not recreate, in Ingold's critique, past 'scapes'. Rather, they are entirely different realms of experience. Phenomenology gives us a basic approach to digital platforms to understand how they influence sensory experience and thus the recreation of memory.
Yet while we may now challenge Schafer's assertions, the crux of his argument remains undeniably essential to sound studies: listen to your environment. The only way we can understand sound is to experience it in space. Meditative attentiveness to sound goes a long way. Even Ihde, who took a different approach to sound than Schafer concluded that waiting is the only appropriate response to silence. For "waiting is a 'letting be' which allows that which continuously 'is given' into space and time to be noted. 'Silence is the sound of time passing.'"2
Sound studies challenges our conditioning towards thought as a - the - cognitive process. Why must we prioritize thinking above all other cognitive activities? What if, instead, we focused on listening? What if we were attentive to the past and mindful about history? What if we allowed mindfulness to take over? We cannot control our thoughts so what if we disengaged from them and allowed ourselves to listen to the world around us? What if we stopped allowing thought - so powerful from its habituation - to command intuition and feeling? We will become more connected to the complexities of the world of into which we are sown the very fabric. Of course, this mindful, neo-stoic approach is mired in its own historicity and I must recognize that. But my task as a historian is to approach sound in a different way to create a new story through my interpretation.
Whereas I can explain the cognitive framework I use to approach this historical study, it is fair to critique the goal of this project: why explore sound at all? Sound is an aspect of everyday life, as it is heard, felt, imagined, discussed, and remembered. Yet to the average person how important was, or memorable does sound remain? Sound is so ubiquitous to our culture that I have trouble believing in its importance. But as Jonathan Sterne writes, "[t]here is no knowledge of sound that comes from outside culture." Therefore even my critique and quesitoning of sound's historical relevance is a culturally and historically motivated question. My goal is to rework my cultural understanding of sound as underrepresented in history, to push new histories and alternative understandings of a history with little written about it - a history that, so far as I know, exists mostly in sound already through the voices of those who lived it. Essentially, I am brushing history against the grain, which is in-itself not truth but my own partiality and historicity as a student of sound studies (and I am using the historical methodology I have come to know). Indeed, as Sterne argues, sound is an experience and thus a priori to methodology. Therefore, there is no single way to study or produce a history.
It is often held in sound studies that sound does not hold the same privileged position in western thought and culture as visuality. In Sonic Persuasion, Greg Goodale argues that our attention to the visual has been entrenched from the Platonic age.[3] Sound studies has a relatively small historiography. I want to argue that it is not that sound is underrepresented in history or even memory. Rather, projects that highlight soundscapes displace sound from its relative cognitive ubiquity. Forefronting soundscapes allows us to reposition sound in the structure of memory and historical imagination. Because sound is integral to human experience, not a categorical element of reality. Sound studies is a growing field of academic concern and many projects attempt to 'recreate soundscapes'. Indeed, it is practical and even intuitive to speak of sound as a distinct category. We must ultimately understand sound not as a 'scape', but as a structure of reality.
The State of Sound Studies: Current Projects and Potential

My research is a historical soundscape falling under the 'discipline' of sound studies. However, I also incorporate theories from Tim Ingold and Ian Hodder regarding the specifics of bodies incorporated in landscapes (in my case, a variation of the soundscape). Though such an understanding of sound is not mutually exclusive with traditional cultural studies, my project has been heavily influneced by archaeological sensory studies at a theoretical level - my work looks and feels more like the historical sound studies projects I discuss in this chapter.
My project intersects 'physical' and virtual soundscapes. The focus on cultural sound studies promoted by Sterne et al. in his paradigmatic Sound Studies Reader (an important source for all sound studies researchers) while necessary, is not entirely sufficient for my project. Perhaps more important to this project is the work done by Mark Grimshaw and Tom Garner on the sonification of virtual environments. Because most sound studies projects use digital platforms. Below, I will outline several key projects with different goals that have influenced my project and how I have approached soundscapes.
Foundsounds is a crowdsourced geo-tagging project for Apple's mobile operating system. It enables users to tag the landscape with sounds recorded at a specific location. Then other users are notified when they near a location previously tagged by other users. A similar project, Guggenheim Museum's Still Spotting project, is a crowdsourced initiative where people describe sound by locations in New York City. Their interactive map contains no sound in it whatsoever. The Still Spotting project implies an important question: why must sound be heard as content, from a tangible source? Sound can be described by voice - heard or read in text, or even hearing an imagined voice in your head.
Stuart Eve researched embodied Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in his project Dead Men's Eyes. Eve created an augmented reality system "built using a smartphone, an Arduino microcontroller and a Unity3D application." Using Unity3D, he reconstructed Bronze Age British huts in an attempt to see what one might have seen at that time. Wheras Eve's work concerns visuality, he incorporated sounds to his viewshed. He included auditory markers at house doorways such as sheep grazing, changing the way he now looked at the landscape. [113-114] Eve currently experiments with ancient smellscapes. Using the same microcomputing platform, Eve augments the landscape with wafting smells. As he comments in a blog post, "Not only can I walk around the modern day Bronze Age landscape and see the augmented roundhouses, hear the Bronze Age sheep in the distance, I can also smell the fires burning and the dinner cooking as I get closer to the village." Eve's work makes an important point about experiencing landscape: it is not merely a visual experience and incorporating other elements of experience representing landscape changes the nature of that experience.
Jeff Veitch does archaeological research at the ancient Roman site Ostia. Veitch's research explores how noise sounds in ancient spaces. Veitch played several clips of Johnny Cash's God's Gonna Cut you Down with different reverbations in the Baths of Neptune. Veitch claims that "[b]y using a contemporary song, the focus shifts to the changes created by the space, not the authenticity of the sound... The music is only a tool, which conveys architectural information." Veitch's approach is similar to the archaeologist Tara Copplestone's method of photobashing. Copplestone writes that is "a technique by which one takes photos and applies various techniques such as painting, filtering, overlaying and otherwise obliterating the original photo through manipulation." In these terms we can liken Veitch's approach to a 'soundbash' whereby a space's 'original' sounds are 'obliterated'. Veitch's research is important because he tackles the authenticity of sound.
The acoustics of architecture is a popular area of sound studies. Emily Neumeier's Ottoman History Soundscape project explores how sound can be used to evoke nostalgia. Neumeier recorded the sounds of historical sites around Istanbul. Neumeier also explores how sound has been used to control space. For example, voice was controlled in the Ottoman courts as a performance for the visitors of the Sultan. Hundreds of people were forced to remain silent, viewed like statues. Neumeier also notes how sound can tell us about Ottoman political history. The call to prayer that resounded through Istanbul changed from Turkish to Arabic over the centuries. Sound, then, is telling of historical change. The introduction of steam boats changed the way the landscape was experienced. For the first time, residents could see Istanbul from the water as the sound of the steam boats filled the city. The Istanbul soundscape is an entanglement of the past and present. Neumeier attempted to record areas of silence but was continually interupted by the sounds of tourists. Neumeier realized she could not recreate the past soundscapes as the present one flooded the landscape.
Archaeologists have produced amazing experimental projects that require great attention to detail and hours of technical work preparing sound. As Veitch notes, "[m]ost people haven’t spent hours listening to tracks, adjusting the EQ or reverb. Most of us don’t connect what we hear with the space we hear those sounds in. And most of us don’t think about the space that is created in the post-production of making a record. At the same time, it’s a great exercise in relating acoustic discussions to different spaces." However, we must also problematize these projects. When the goal is 'recreating' space, we fail to acknowledge that landscape is a fluid experience, not something to be reconstructed. Maybe it is a semantic argument - especially considering how amazing it is when archaeologists digitally reconstruct and play sounds in buildings - but representation is a more forgiving word that acknowledges our inability to ever recapture a moment that once existed as a concrete entity. The past is comprised of experience, not realities frozen in time. Maybe at this stage in sound studies we need to make our critiques explicit to users.
Currently, the most similar project to my own is The Roaring Twenties. The project connects sound to urbanization. I found nothing on noise complaints in Pembroke. This is not to say they did not exist. Yet Pembroke has never been an urban centre. Most urban or industrial sounds would have occurred during the day. From the Roaring Twenties introduction "Letters, forms, photographs, sound motion pictures, and other kinds of artifacts cumulatively constitute a network of content and context that engages the visitor's historical imagination. The goal is to enable each visitor to chart their own unique journey through this material and thereby transport themselves back in time, constructing a historically-oriented mindset through which to perceive the images and sounds."
"To recover that meaning [historicized listening] we need to strive to enter the mindsets of the people who perceived those sounds, to undertake a historicized mode of listening that tunes modern ears to the pitch of the past." While I agree with their sentiments, this project suffers from the idea that by researching the sounds and variables of an environment, recreating those sounds, and then posting them for our listeners, we can 'recreate' a sonic environment. At best we are representing past landscapes. And there is more representation in the presentation of a digital environment than in the authentic content of sound. It disregards the history of the code, the way the website is constructed, and instead aims to show only a front-end product.
The project alludes to noise as a threat. While they are honest that we cannot fully reconstruct the past, they say instead that the project helps to illuminate issues with noise pervasiness in the present, citing that people tune themselves out with smartphones and iPods. This is an unfair and lazy use of the past to make claims about assumed negative effects of contemporary technology. Michael Bull discusses how iPod users shape the aesthetic experience of the urban landscape through audio choice. Bull argues that portable media "energizes" and transforms "mundane space," making it more emotional.[199-200] Portable media is a serious area of human experience. However, using noise complaints, the project successfully challenges a nostalgic reaction to the urban cacophony of noise by showing that it had a substantial negative impact on New York residents. But they make claims that personal technology
Furthermore, they show that simply because noise is ubiquitous does not mean people treat it unconsciously. New Yorkers worked in urban landscapes. Likewise industrial workers listen to their machines for feedback while pursuing the task at hand. It challenges the idea that ubiquity means accepted and 'background' - that people live out their tasks within that ubiquitous sphere of sound. Certain sounds are ubiquitous to certain people in specific contexts.
The soundscape projects I have presented all recognize the idea of space regarding sound: whether a map, reconstructing archaeological sites, or the ability to tag sounds to a location. My project explores the relationship between sound and space, but not in the way most sensory studies projects approach it. The art of soundbashing, recreating historical spaces with sound, soundsheds, and other studies of space and sound are amazing and I hope that I can do similar work with the Pembroke Soundscapes project in the future. But my project focused on the relationship between sound and memory. Yet many of these projects explore ancient or fargone places. My project, aside from being a pedagogical tool, is for the living residents of Pembroke who remember this recent history.
What about open access and the digital landscape? Are these other projects now entangled in this history of Pembroke? They make a sound of their own. It is more absurd and less coherent. But if you do not know about it, is it still entangled? I believe it is still entangled because these are still part of this project, its foundation, and a creation of my own understanding towards a platform - not necessarily the best, but the most feasible, best choice to represent this history and play into all facets of this project. That is no easy task - to find a reproducible digital platform that focuses on accessiblity, appropriate historical sonification, and is at the same time feasible for a Master's project.
Tying it all together

I started this project with little direction. I recorded woodworking sounds at the Ottawa City Woodshop to experience sound in place and to have somewhat 'authentic' sounds to represent sounds of Pembroke's industry. I am left with a lot of great theory, different projects for influence, and ways to approach sound in Pembroke. Yet how can I tie it all together? My map has to show the following:
The industrial soundscape of Pembroke in a more literal sense (i.e. creating industrial soundclips).
That sound, landscape, and task are entangled in a historically imagined "cacophony" of noise. We can never disentangle this cacophony (nor should we, for that would render it meaningless and flat - to expand the analogy, how could you hear in a vaccum? Variations in landscape allow for silences as well and thus for remembering and forgetting).
That sound is spatial: sound originates from a source, but is nevertheless ubquitous throughout the landscape. Likewise, that sound is task. That space is landscape but landscape is not necessarily concrete tangible space - landscape is the entirety of experience.
That sound is an important historical phenomenon and, while ubiquitous, has complex, ever changing value through cognition and memory.
That sound is a phenomenological experience
I am writing for different publics. I know their expectations and the seriousness of this project as a historical pedagogical tool. I cannot just do something historically 'artsy' or theoretical such as an abstract sound-bash and say that it is historically 'deep' and valid. While an interesting artistic feat, not only does it not account for the different stakeholders involved, but it is lazy. Such an artistic approach does not push me to weave together practical complexities nor think past the contexts of this project.
But it still needs some sort of binding historical narrative. This is something my publics expect. How can I avoid simply 'recreating authentic soundscapes', while staying true to the taskscape (i.e. including sounds of the industrial taskscape), yet also implying notions that historically sonfiying the landscape is as much a past act as it is a current one within space (because the map cannot state this explictly; this is the hardest part - representing through my map rather than having just an essay for people to read about ideas).
Thus my map represents the cacophony of noise: industrial-specific sounds that represent the tasks of Pembroke's landscape. This gets more at what Jose is doing in his plight of 'recreating' Madrid soundscapes. My map combines traditional historical 'facts' about Pembroke's industry and sonified stories to create affect.
Terminology

In Chapter 3 I deal more with the historiography of soundscapes and my own understanding of sonified landscapes. For now I will define how I use specific jargon.
Soundscape: A general defintion used to describe sound in an envrionment. An explicative term that categorizes sound over other phenomenon and 'senses'.
Landscape: I use the anthropologist Tim Ingold's definition of landscape from The Perception of the Environment. Landscape is not material land nor is it an object of our cognition to be captured in painting, photograph, or map. Rather, landscape is process - that is, the reworking of the tangible and intangible environment by humans dwelling in space through daily tasks. Not only do landscape and the human body imply each other, but sound is a phenomenon from task. I use landscape as a placeholder word to represent spatial reality - not as something concrete but as all space phenomenologically experienced.
Sonification: The deliberate use of sound made by humans in landscape through task. Bringing sound to the forefront of a historical narrative/adding sound to digital environments.
Entanglement: The archaeologist Ian Hodder states that "[h]umans work within webs of meaning that often seem arbitrary, symbolic, and representational... the webs and networks in which humans live are as much symbolic, meaningful, spiritual, religious, conceptual as they are practical and technical, economic and social... the web is seamlessly material and immaterial." Entanglements are webs of connection involving, but not limited to, material things. Within webs of human entanglement, societies are formed not out of idealism or materialism but "by the contingent ways in which the multiple strands of entanglement are tied together."[97] Hodder argues that we tend to forget the history of "things" for several reasons of ubiquity: [102-103 Hodder]
We do not need to know how something works until it breaks.
Our habitual routinization with things makes them and their working ubiquitous.
How things work are often hidden.
The strings of entanglement are often so long and complex and chaotic that we cannot monitor them
Things take on different temporalities. Entanglements transform based on a thing's use and we lose track of their history.
Things become distanced on place and time
Resources

Github is an online repository to host projects and manage files.
This book was written with GitBook, an online platform for writing in markdown, a simple markup language.
Pykwiki is static site generator for notes built on Python.
I used Open Data Kit to collect audio recordings and tag them with metadata. ODK is a mobile database that uses Google's AppEngine service to host your data. (My own server is here). I used ODK in conjunction with a paid-for app RecForge II Pro (there are free versions of RecForge, as well as other great free recording apps). You will find that a smartphone is your biggest asset to field work.
I recorded some sounds at the Ottawa City Woodshop.
I uploaded all sound clips that I recorded to my Soundcloud account. These are free to download, use, and remix.
Free Sound is an online community for free, crowdsourced, downloadable soundclips.
Soundcite for playable sounds within text in the online version of this book.
Audacity is a free sound editing program.
The Pembroke Soundscapes website was built with Bootstrap a free, open source framework for developing responsive websites.
Footnotes

1 Ihde 5
2 Ihde 113
3 Grimshaw and Garner 23
4 Grimshaw and Garner 21