The Sounds of Silence

Whose landscape? Multitudes of Voices

In her book The Future of Nostalgia, Svetlana Boym urges historians to accept nostalgia as a serious and integral part of the human experience. She urges, however, that we cannot allow nostalgia to be purely sentimental. Sentimental nostalgia "turns affection an suffering into ready-made postures that inevitably produce reactions on the part of the reader."[338] Sensitivity, however, "allows for both ethical tolerance and aesthetic bliss" that fosters a sense of connection to other people.[338]. Sentimentality, Boym argues, is historically the place of evil. She shows that even men like Hitler were sentimental: they weeped in the face of art and loved their families. Those same men also exploited mass sentimentality to commit atrocities on a mass scale. Fascism thrived because it played on the emotions of a sentimental past. The tragedy of history, that the past is forever gone, should be met with sensitivity over sentimentality.
For me, the sounds of the Ottawa City Woodshop were almost relaxing, reassuring noises of accomplishment - I had finally began recording for this project. Yet how can I write a history sensitive to the past when this is the way I approach recording noise. I am not fostering a connection to those who may have different, possibly negative experiences of these same sounds. My initial reaction is to say that I do not want the sound of relaxation or accomplishment on my part to shine through such a complex historical soundscape. What if by hearing my imperfect history you are able to see so much more. It is a tough process to balance a lesson and a history. Because I do not also want to denigrate a history personal to many people merely to 'teach you a lesson' about truth in history.
Sound studies should be historical, focusing on the historicity of sound and the way we listen. My project does this by focusing on the value of sound. What of value, though? To a white worker, industrial sounds could sound mostly positive, associated with prosperity and work. To different people, the sound of picketers could be tragic since jobs are jeopordized, positive since people desire economic change, negative since workers are stopping production. To an Aboriginal person of Pembroke maybe the industrial soundscape has a different story. Perhaps an Aboriginal Soundscape would not even focus on industry. Maybe that would not be as high priority as I have given it. In fact, the industrial history of Pembroke is not even as high a priority for many residents. However large that Facebook group is, only a small minority of the people interact with the group, and they are even a specific, older public within that community.
In 2012, the geographer Michael Gallagher produced a walking tour of the ruins of St Peter’s College at Kilmahew in Scotland: He describes the project as "an experimental environmental audio work about a ruinous landscape, designed to be listened to on portable MP3 players whilst walking in that landscape." Users can download the audio and site maps from their website and visit the ruins to begin exploring. Gallagher noted that the walking tour had a considerable affect on its users.
There is no reason why audio geographies should make places safe and comprehensible for easy consumption. The Kilmahew drift reflected the site’s contested history and uncertain future rather than smoothing over its problems. Nevertheless, I was taken aback by the affective intensity experienced by some listeners. It is therefore worth considering the ethical implications of inviting members of the public to engage with such works. Auditioned on headphones in situ, environmental audio is immersive and constantly unfolding, without the safe distance and reassuring stability of written texts.
Gallagher's audio drift reminds me of a summer I spent in Algonquin Park, Ontario. I portaged deep into the Park to the point of feeling entirely separate from the urban landscape and immersed in quiet. When one morning over the ridge behind my tent, I suddenly heard a chainsaw and people working. It shook me from my experience of that landscape. The ominous presence of those sounds gave me an uneasy feeling. My experience of the landscape changed immediately. Without actually seeing the workers, through sound, I could visualize in my imagination workers - conducting the tasks of modern civilization - over the ridge. I am not here passing a value judgement that certain sounds are inherently bad or good through that experience. In that phenomenological experience, the landscape changed. And it was not merely a sound 'scape', but the Ingoldian landscape where distinct sensory categories do not exist, but blend to make experience. Moreover, my experience shows the affective power of sound. With digital projects, we risk approaching the past as 'historical tourists' who can explore space with a detached feeling, and no responsibility to be sensitive to the past. But a soundscape built to contest immediate experience can affectively situate us in an environment.
By its nature, I do not believe my project can currently function as intimately with physical sites as Gallagher's audio drift. But I use sound similarly to both evoke memory and contest sentimental nostalgia. I hope that my project, dealing with a history of striking can create discussion about Pembroke's uneasy industrial past, and foster sensitivity towards nostalgia. Because there is noting more dangerous than untempered nostalgia, especially nostalgia for a time, a place, or a sound one might have never experienced. Such is historical imagination, giving rise to imagined memories of a bygone era.
We thus need collaboration so that we can contest spaces. I have told a particular story about Pembroke's past. But I have left this project open not just to possibilities of other Pembroke soundscapes, but to be remixed as much as anyone desires. Open access is integral to humanities scholars. Open access has followed a largely positivist trajectory of making as much material accessible online as possible. But we have seen the problems this creates that humanities scholars must confront. Open access historical newspapers, as I discussed in Chapter 1, are often stripped of their context since it is the text which is understood as information. Exploring open access, then, we can see a history entangled with positivist ideas of data and information and a social structure that discriminates based on identity. This is why we need historians to practice open access. We need to bring the same level of critique from textual sources to the online world. We need to understand how a digital project works and critique both the source code and the historian's method. We need to make our process, sources, and work available online. This is, of course, easier said than done. One's identity makes working online either incredibly easy or difficult and potentially threatening.
I do not want to make myself out to be a historical martyr. But I am willing to fail to if in the clammer of falling you realize where the silences of this project reverberate. As Ihde argues, sometimes in performance, sudden changes to sound can disembody you and make you feel foreign.1 We need to heed Friedrich Netizsche's words: "I wish that they should not remain unfamiliar with profound self-contempt, the torture of self-mistrust, the wretchedness of the vanquished."2 I wish this to you historians. For I know that I am at some level just writing for myself.
I am aware of the affordances and limitations of my project. But is being aware of the reverberating affect of this project in its entire negative and positive outcome enough? I have tried to be sensitive to the past. I have tried my best to create a 'public history'. Maybe all we can hope for in doing public history is forgiveness where we have tried to be sensitive. Forgive me.
The Bow Falls

Above all, I want to show you how to listen to context. This project changes depending on the modes and methods with which you will experience it. If you are reading this on paper, then you are experiencing a different soundset than the one I intended. For those online readers, specific instances of text have playable soundclips from a variety of sources. This is not to say that the paper is lacking. It is much different. And I hope you listen to your environment. I hope you hear that this project changes everytime you listen to it. Then will you understand that sound is fleeting. Maybe your own circumstance has made you more apathetic to this project. Maybe when you listen to it again you will be more empathetic (or vice versa). Maybe you are not paying close attention to my words because you are busy. There are inifintely many scenarios in which you can and will confront this project and that is what makes this exciting. Because there were equally infinitely many scenarios in which I create this project - each emotion and circumstance reverberating with every keystroke.
I want you to embrace the tragedy that I have written here, for all history is tragedy. These sounds are now gone - and gone with it the reality of each particular moment, caught up in the reverberation of the past. I was tempted to write that maybe Pembroke is just a placeholder for a larger, more meaningful idea that the past is entirely bound within time - that this tragedy applies to all of history.
But I long stopped speaking about such big ideas and grand meanings, for they are unappolagetically sentimental. And pure sentimentality holds no sensitivty to the past. Such a post-modern idea does not account for the reality that the people for whom this project seeks keep it alive with such nostalgia and meaning. It is not just a placeholder for them but life itself. And am I so ignorant not to see that I am one for whom this project was written? Ideas fall into and out of each other. I have always written to sound.
Mahler's falling ninth symphony.
And now the bows are falling. I have little left to write. Maybe I will pick up tomorrow. Maybe I will leave it so. Maybe a new song will inspire me to write, change the tone, and leave you with a different impression. But I was always one for tragedy. All I can do is write to the music. Maybe there was more I could have said. But I must eventually stop and honour time - the temporality of my landscape.
The strings have all fallen silent. The reverberation of the bows still rings in my ears. I have listened passionately. I open my eyes. The crowd gazes back at me. I realize I hear only silence. The reverberation is entirely my imagination because I had listened honestly and I was caught up in sound of the past. As Grimshaw and Garner uphold, "Imagined sound is sound."3 I am the conductor tonight. I had imagined everything except my loneliness on that stage. The audience did not see a clown. They saw a conductor. Do they know the difference? I bow to the audience in silence. I hope I did an honest job. The sounds of silence slowly fade away as I realize my circumstance. There is that soft hum that pervades any space. There are small creaks, the passing of cars, maybe a voice outside. I sit here at my computer, typing. I had always moved my hands to the rise and fall of the bows, but I never stopped to see or listen if I had an audience. Yet here you are, watching me. It is silent. I hope you heard the music that engulfed my being this entire time. It was quite the show, was it not?
Sometimes I still do not know who I am writing for or who is listening. We always talk of historical affect and creating empathy. This is what empathy is: we each sit surrounded by a world of silence, engulfed in spheres of constant noise. Personal flow is important to a meaningful life. But we can occasionally look about in the infinite silence and see, listen, or at least hope that others look back at us and share the feeling that we are all listening to something important.
The Angel of History

All of our truths float over the abyss. We construct the ground upon which we stand. We convince ourselves that we stand on ancient, solid stone; we stomp upon infinitely forged iron cast from the fires of memory; we could never burn the great oak which reaches down forever... for we are standing proudly upon history. We do not realize that there is no ground, only abyss. We are the angels of history, flying infinitely above the consuming darkness.
Yet we believe we stand; we do not even know we have wings. "Beware that, when fighting monsters, you yourself do not become a monster... for when you gaze long into the abyss. The abyss gazes also into you."4 We convince ourselves that we stand on solid ground because we fear gazing into the abyss. Ah, but the abyss always gazes into us... the trap door opens and we fall into nothingness.
All you have now is eternal silence. You have no direction. Listen.
But do you not have wings? The last sound you hear is your own wings unfolding into the abyss. You have no direction. Fly.
Footnotes

1 Ihde 82
2 Nietzsche
3 Grimshaw and Garner 4
4 Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil, 87 https://archive.org/details/beyondgoodandevi00nietuoft