If Everyone was Listening

The actors and jesters are here
The stage is in darkness and clear
For raising the curtain+

and no-one's quite certain whose play it is
How long ago, how long
If only we had listened then.
If we'd known just how right we were going to be.
For we dreamed a lot
And we schemed a lot
And we tried to sing of love before the stage fell apart...
If everyone was listening you know
There'd be a chance that we could save the show,
Who'll be the last clown
To bring the house down?
Oh no, please no, don't let the curtain fall.
If Everyone was Listening, Supertramp (1974)
The Importance of Listening

I often wonder if I will be the last clown. The opening Supertramp song implies much about sound as performance, the importance of sound in performance, and my process as a historian of sound. For sound is a performance, not just as voice but by task. As a historian, I hope I will never be the last clown. I do not want to imply with those lyrics that I am somehow prophetically warning that historians ought to pay attention to sound or we will never truly save history. What if this whole project misses potentially profound insights on sound? Will I then be just a clown?
If a historian makes mistakes, writes a contentious article, or makes false claims, they may confront academic critique. Or they may slip through the cracks depending on who follows their work. Historians cite their sources, but who really has the time, desire, or even the accessibility of those sources, to check their work? All other things being equal, traditional academia is much safer than its online counterpart. Failure in traditional academia may no doubt damage a historians career or scholarly position. But traditional academia is an insular community. If a historian fails online, writes something ridiculous on social media, the stakes are much higher. Following open access properly, we cite and link to our sources, document our process, and share our resources (within the limits of copyright and ethics). In theory, this permits others to check our work with more ease than traditional historical research, fostering transparency in our method. But theory is fiend to practice. As I argued in the previous chapter, even online, open scholarly writing is prone to the metaphorical academic stasis - few people, rarely any outside of academia, read our academic work.
Historical work on social media platforms, however, is the signal in academic noise. Historians must realize the online places where people experience history. This chapter explores the importance of social media for public history projects and how we can listen to our publics, even when we have no idea who they may be.
Listening and Public History

Does an open access digital history project not influence how we think about the 'public' in public history? Public history drives the digital aspect of the Pembroke Soundscapes project. The open access element of this project is essentially what makes it a digital public history project. I am not just focused on the Pembroke residents and immediate stakeholders. I am allowing anyone to get involved by through a variety of digital platforms, from this GitBook to my open research notebook. But the most effective platform of historical discussion is social media.
Social media is a highly effective method to share digital projects. I created a Facebook community page called the Pembroke Soundscapes Project to advertise and share updates on my project, create a forum to localize discussion, and to allow users to share photos, stories, and memories. I had primarily used Twitter to advertise my project, share updates, and link to posts from my open notebook. But I had untapped the potential of Facebook as a medium for historical communities. I followed the work of my friend and colleague, Sara Nixon, with her Grimsby Timescapes project, an iPhone app that explores the town of Grimsby, Ontario through historical photographs. Sara facilitated the public side of her project through a successful community page on Facebook with over 300 likes, the Grimsby Timescapes App Page. Sara told me how community shaped the life of her social media.
I set up the Grimsby Timescapes page to originally gather participants to test the app. It's life kind of evolved and is now more of a community for sharing Grimsby's history and other local heritage projects/events more generally... However, the people who go to the page are mostly interested in sharing photographs and stories of grimsby's history more generally. What I found most striking about the page was how easily it was accepted into the large Grimsby Facebook community. I share statuses, links, photos from other pages and they share what I post.
Sara and I discussed why my Facebook page had virtually failed to become a community page. At its peak, my page had a total of six likes. Maybe I did not promote it well enough. But that was not a sufficient answer. I explained to Sara that "I keep finding a trend that it's the 'community-up' groups that are so active. It's almost as if [those communities are] more salient ground to share photos, stories, etc. than a museum page, or a more academic one." As successful as her project was, Sara also noticed that there are much more popular Facebook communities around Grimsby's history such as the Vintage Grimsby Facebook page with over 2000 likes. She theorized that this could be an issue of authority since "[c]ommunity members might feel like they share an equal voice on a community-run page and thus are more inclined to share and contribute to the page."
The most effective use of social media for this project has been through the community-run Pembroke Facebook group I'm from Pembroke Ontario and I'm not Ashamed to Admit it on Facebook. The group has over 4000 likes and it is active daily. Of course this is a specific public, one that has a certain nostalgia attached to it which is reproduced by the people. It is an online hub for strangers and neighbours to talk about Pembroke, ask questions and share historical memories, and post photos from the past. It has become more of a historical community than an advertising space for local events. By using the Pembroke community page, then, I must be aware that I am approaching a specific public. But just because a community is particular does not mean it is inherently problematic. For our goal as public historians cannot be to write our history for 'the public' as some outside, all encompassing entity? We must be aware of the public for whom we do history. We are all involved in constantly fluctuating communities, many of which are now online or at least interact with history on the internet. Historians must be honest about who their publics are before embarking on public projects. This means recognizing that they are part of their public. By viewing, sharing, and participating in the Pembroke Facebook group I am part of that community and not simply using the group for my project.
Public historians must then act ethically online and on social media. We cannot just use these community groups for information or historical analysis. We have to give back to them too. In many ways, what I did 'live' online that was most impactful was sharing in the Pembroke Facebook community. I used Twitter to share my reflection and academic updates, but never historical photos. GitBook allows users to comment on each paragraph and although colleagues supported my book, no one left feedback. People support the idea, but like most academic work, who really has the desire and time to read my reflection? I realized that viewed with an academic backdrop, this project may not receive the same input or level of discussion as when I post archival photos to the Pembroke Facebook group.
Historians must be aware of their digital footprint. We are as much a part of our publics as sound is an experience of reality. It is easy to dismiss social media as a non-academic platform for history. Any glance at the comment section of a Youtube video or large online community can easily turn someone off from social media as a serious place for historical discussion. Social media creates new avenues for open access projects - but these are not necessarily inherently better. The importance of open access: this project must evolve. Yet future publics will be created and changed. We have to hope that others can use our ideas, resources, and source code to develop and contest our narratives.
The accessibility of historical material through social media raises important questions for public historians: must the public that a history regards be vast and wide-reaching? Does widening my 'advertising' space, simultaneously creating and reaching more publics, a better approach? I wonder if I am, in fact, caught in the globalist utopia imagined in open access. Why is my goal to make this history widely accessible? The intuitive answer is to allow knowledge to proliferate. And I mostly agree with this sentiment. But the more accurate answer is that it is not necessarily about sharing the history of Pembroke. It is completely fine that a history of Pembroke remains important only to past and present residents of Pembroke, or even small groups within these publics. The reality is that certain histories will only be cherished by certain people. Instead, sharing this project allows a wider audience to explore open access and use the source code or ideas to create new digital projects to present a range of histories. This widening method thus allows for a more diverse approach to historical method from a variety of publics, intersecting or entirely apart from each other. We can now engage with and create new publics - ones I would have never interacted with if I chose a more traditional approach.
At a fundamental level, the goal of collaboration is to widen the historical playing field to represent more experiences. And this is not necessarily because I believe that more stories means a better history. Storytelling is an art and history is a shifting landscape with peaks and valleys. Stories arise in and out of fashion. Rather, this democratization or collaboration of history is not untempered. This is what Sara and I discussed about authority and digital history projects. Social media changes the location of historical work. My project does not just exist on my website or this GitBook, but my interactions on social media. The history becomes mapped out to a variety of online locations. Historians using social media, then, may change the nature of their projects but not necessarily the authority. The internet is thus not a flattening of politics and identity. People still pay attention to our online footprint. They expect a level of work from historians. They see historians as researchers who gather information, evidence, stories, to create a factual narrative. Thus we should not deny the historian's interpretive power. The historian ought to play a pivotal role in shaping history only as long as we are sensitive to others' experiences. This includes ethically and seriously interacting with online communities. I experienced this with the Pembroke Facebook group in relation to my own project page. The Pembroke Facebook group is a serious community around which people organize their lives and memory. I am not able to take that away from them, nor should I. Historians should continue to influence the historical imagination of online communities only if they remain attentive to the stakeholders involved.
Open access and social media allow us to critically engage public history in digital environments. Public Historians have long been aware that they create publics. But it is easy to assume in the apparently daunting reality of so called 'digital age' that their is a single digital audience much like we assume there is 'the public'. Ideas about the connectedness of the internet and global sharing of knowledge prevail. Open access should not just be a democratizing buzzword we throw around but a terminological paradigm for a much deeper discussion about publics in the digital age and how historians perform online.
Who will be the Last Clown?

Historians love using the word performance, and rightly so - performance implies practice (tasks and skill) and a self-awareness of our actions. I publicly performed by writing this book online, publishing notes in an open notebook, and interacting with social media and online communities. Yet the word performance can imply (though not intentionally) that we approach life like the actor of a play or a movie, where a scene has been rehearsed and practiced repeatedly. Where all the variables remain the same and we keep doing it until the director and producer agree that we have done a phenomenal job. Perhaps social media is more of a performance than daily physical interactions because we can edit our posts and take time to form ideas. But no performance can be perfected. And even behind the guise of social media and online publishing, we cannot fully anticipate our audiences. Even acting online - gathering analytics, studying communities, and learning patterns of user interactions - eventually requires a leap of faith when publishing or sharing anything.
Perhaps, then, we should understand performance phenomenologically - that is, acting in a reality that reveals itself to us constantly. We should embrace an understanding that the Czech author Milan Kundera outlines in his 1984 novel The Unbearable Lightness of Being.
We can never know what to want, because, living only one life, we can neither compare it with our previous lives nor perfect it in our lives to come... There is no means of testing which decision is better, because there is no basis for comparison. We live everything as it comes, without warning, like an actor going on cold. And what can life be worth if the first rehearsal for life is life itself? That is why life is always like a sketch. No, sketch is not quite the word, because a sketch is an outline of something, the groundwork for a picture, whereas the sketch that is our life is a sketch for nothing, an outline with no picture.1
I always knew I was an actor: historically and performing as a historian. I never thought I would be a clown. I am the clown and the child. My imagination creates the clown. I am performing every role. The stage is in "darkness and clear" because I stand alone. The audience watches me change my masks, yet for me I am changing nothing. I hear the silence of the crowd watching me play. Their gaze is nothing without their silence. That is what frightens me. They knew well before I did that I was here performing for them all alone. Historians manage and organize research; the audience sees a conductor where I see a clown.
Clowns get a bad reputation. They are fools, tricksters, and jokesters. They wear masks. But it is our fault to see them purely as trivial entertainment. Their performance is honest. They do what they can with their audience. They need not be trivial. If all I can do is clammer around and make some people laugh in the process, then I will at least try to do it honestly.
Footnotes