Sonifying the Landscape

The Taskscape and the Temporality of Landscape

Perhaps the most important theoretical idea gaining popularity in sound studies was preempted in 2000 by the Anthropologist Tim Ingold from "The Temporality of Landscape" in The Perception of the Environment. Sound for Ingold is a phenomenon of experience, not an object or material as sound recording technology deceives our historicity. "We do not hear a soundscape,"[against soundscape] Ingold remarks, but experience landscape. Why should we create a 'scape' purely reserved for sound? Sound is landscape. Essential to landscape (in the sense that I defined in the introduction to this book is taskscape. The taskscape is the patterns of dwelling, or the tasks of humans reworking the landscape [162]. Temporality is essential to the taskscape because dwelling is a temporal activity [172]. Temporality is not chronology or even history, but the movement of the taskscape. As Ingold states, the "currency of labour is time [158]." Temporality and historicity are not opposed but rather merge in the experience of those who, in their activities, carry forward the process of social life [157]. But, as Hodder notes, although things have temporality - humans are mending things constantly, changing things - we owe the inventor of the wheel when we drive our car [98]. Hodder dissolves the distinction between taskscape and landscape. Everything in existence or in our perceptive realities has a history of entanglement. The landscape takes on the historicity of dwelling.
In 2007, Ingold critiqued the rigidity of soundscapes in an aptly titled article "Against Soundscape." Ingold uses his phenomenological approach from "The Temporality of Landscape" to critique soundscapes that imply experience as lines of "sensory pathways." Like breathing, sound flows in our experience and cannot be captured as a 'scape'. Maybe Ingold's critique of soundscapes was more pertinent in 2007. But sensory studies has come a long way over the past decade. Ingold suggests a phenomenology that is at least now discussed in sound studies and becoming accepted by many, specifically Grimshaw and Garner. Their study of sound applies here because, for them, sound arises through task from a source. But the location of sound is not an objective, observable, concrete fact. Rather, they argue, we place sound in landscape through experience.
The multi-media experience in my project is important because of Ingold's assertion that sound is not its own 'scape' but as much an experience of landscape as air. Visuals from newspapers, photographs, video, text, as well as the map itself, attempt to represent the experiential element of a 'soundscape' without just containing sound. But context is everything and this multi-media approach does not necessarily make this project better. For Charles Hirschkind, recorded Islamic sermons during Egypt's religious resurgence had only recorded voice. Men listened to them in taxis, with portable audio players, walking, or sitting. Their phenomenological experience was tied to the experience around them in an era of growing religiosity in markets, near minarets, etc. Hearing religious texts was integral to being more religious and in touch with God. This is the transduction for Hirschkind. The recorded voice acted as an interplay between listener and religious authority. But tapes, like walking tours, are a specific type of sound experience. What does the experiene of sound confront through the augmented nature of digital landscapes?
Virtual Soundscapes: The Transduction of the Taskscape

Following Stuart Eve's definition, my map is a work of Augmented Visuality: the user works in "real world while visually receiving additional computer generated or modelled information."[20] Websites are traditionally silent spaces. We do not expect most websites to have sound, unless you anticipate a video or visit a music streaming site. But my website forefronts sound: through the audio controls within my interactive map, sound exists in a more expected form. But on the timeline or the front page, where users trigger sound by hovering over HTML elements like an image or button, sound is more unexpected. We are not conditioned to expect sound from statics photographs. My site thus infuences the experience of digital soundscapes. Grimshaw and Garner argue that we cognitively offload sound onto virtual environments - "[t]hat is, I cognitively place sounds in the game world in which I am present despite knowing that the actual location of the sound wave sources is at the headphones or loudspeakers."[35-36] Grimshaw and Garner approach sound phenomenologically. In locating sound as here, there, outside, inside, above, below, "should we not use those experiences as the basis of our determination of the location of sound?"[42]
Perhaps the best way to understand the digital experience of sound is to build our understanding through two ideas, synchresis and transduction. Michael Chion says of synchresis that "for a single body and a single face on the screen, thanks to synchresis, there are dozens of allowable voices - just as, for a shot of a hammer, any one of a hundred sounds will do."[63]. It follows that synchresis only works through assumptions about phenomena. Using the hammer example, one has to know what a hammer sounds like for the post-production hammer sound to work under the guise of synchresis in that scene. Synchresis does not work for everyone. The workers in Pembroke know the machines they used and the sounds they produced. To your passerby, stock sounds do not make a difference. I recently re-watched the film Saving Private Ryan. The powerful opening scene shows the relationship between synchresis and affect. The background explosions, gunshots, bullets whizzing by, screaming and virtually all added in post-production. Yet the scene comes together because it fits. And the visual adds to that affect. Sound is ubiquitous for everyone, but experienced differently. I am not tracking down every piece of machinery and recreating the sounds of the environment - Jose shows us this is impossible and we can strive for better. Synchresis and soundbashing conflict because soundbashing does not concern the 'content' of sound, but how it plays in space.
Synchresis is important to this project because Pembroke stakeholders expect a historical soundscape of industrial sounds connected to a narrative of the industrial past. Synchresis does not work in every situation. But it is useful in representing task. Recalling again Saving Private Ryan, there are two scenes in particular that use synchresis to meld together human reworking of the landscape and natural sounds. As Tom Hanks' squad moves into a village, you are confronted with a visual of rain hitting wide, thick leaves. It is not immediately obvious if we are hearing rain or distant machine gun fire. The sounds blend together as the scene gears up and the squad enters the village. In another scene, the squad moves out of the village to continue their mission. The scene is mostly dark as flashes in the distance light up the soldiers crossing a ridge in the centre of the screen. It is again not immediately obvious whether the booming sound and distant flashes are thunder and lightning or artillery exploding. I have used synchresis to tie the visual and audio of my map and timelines. Within the affordances and limitations of this project, I have merely established a weak synchresis. Synchresis in my project is not nearly as seamless as most cinema. Rather, it acts similar to those two scenes from Saving Private Ryan. The scene forces users to become aware of sound and question its place in a scene. Producers use varying levels of synchresis: an example of strong synchresis is post-production footsteps set to a scene of people walking. The scene's interaction between sound and visual is so seamless that viewers are not aware that the sound was not produced by the action on screen. Phenomenologically speaking, weak synchresis is a more obvious cognitive experience. Synchresis used poorly, then, can shake one's expected phenomenological experience. For instance, Veitch's soundbashing that does not focus on the content of sound and is thus more unexpected for listeners can 'disembody' the expected 'embodiedness' of sound in space, thus helping users to understand how we experience sound. Soundbashing both affirms and shakes our phenomenological experience. There is nothing wrong with challenging phenomenological experience, just as long as we use it as the focus of sound studies.
Stefan Helmreich argues that the "soundscapes of modernity" present sound to us at an "aesthetic and conceptual remove."1 Hemlreich introduced the term transduction, "the transmutation and conversion of signals across media that, when accomplished seamlessly, can produce a sense of effortless presence,"1 to sound studies. Transduction is an argument against our tendency to define digital experiences as immersive. It is a difficult definition to comprehend, however, because of its applicability. Helmreich developed the definition from a deep sea dive. He was in a submarine deep in the ocean when he realized that the digital feedback from machines and voices were all transduced - that is, the human ear cannot hear sound that deep in the ocean. The submarine provided a deceptive environment that allowed them to hear as they would on land. They were not actuall 'immersed' in that underwater environment.
Speaking phenomenologically, we are more aware of transduction in recordings and digital landscapes (even if we think they are authentic representations of environment) than in physical space. There may be some transductive awareness if you stand near a factory, for you know the noise is from a source, but it is not the same as hearing a recording. Thus I follow Helmreich when he says that "[t]ransduction may not work everywhere." My map seems caught between transduction and synchresis. In many ways, transduction and synchresis are similar phenomena. But unlike synchresis, transduction is more obvious and less of a creative deception. Transduction is what appears to us as immersion if we are not careful to understand the space we find ourselves in. While transduction may seem to be a criqitue against phenomenology because we experience immersion in sound environments, we are in fact recognizing how sound is constructed in space - how recorded sound shows us that we are aware of transduction to an extent, since the sounds are not 'organic' to our experience though equally powerful in their own way. You are aware that my map is a transduction. In fact, as much as we transduce to create immersive environments (i.e. augmented reality) an obvious transduction allows you to understand the space as constructed. To append the original definition, then, transduction need not be 'seamless' because with most soundscape projects, no one is deceptively immersed.
My map contains an augmented layer only provided by computers. For you experience the transduction of sound and visuals, but you are not the computer only. Where you access the map at home, school, on your smartphone, etc. also effects your experience. Each contingent situation weaves its own sensory stimuli into the one already around you.
The Problem of Maps

In "Mapping the Digital Empire," Jason Farman asks "if Google Earth’s ancestry is colonial cartography and the tools it utilizes (aerial and satellite imagery) are rooted in militaristic uses, what, if anything, is the empire mapped by this GIS [Geographic Information Systems]? I want to argue that Google Earth’s charting of the globe onto an interactive, web-based GIS is inherently connected to the desire to map out a new territory: the digital empire."[876] Whereas I am not using any of Google's mapping APIs in my project, I am still using mapping software in the same tradition. However, because open mapping software is open source, users can create their own controls and include their own layers. Regardless, I must remain aware of their history or, as Hodder argues, their entangled reality. "Maps, instead of being an objective visualization of a territory are instead unstable signifiers, heavily imbued with the cultural perspectives of the society that created them."[874] Farman argues that as a result we must be sensitive to the way that we use maps.
One way that we can contest the hegemonic nature of single maps is by adding layers. As I discussed in Chapter 1, I added controls for users to select historical maps and control their opacity. However, the layers of my map achieve one goal while creating another potential problem: hstorical maps are shown on the landscape, thus challenging the idea that the base map is the true, accurate map. The opacity slider also achieves the effect that history is entangled in the current Pembroke mapscape. But it may also achieve the negative effect that we can remove the historical Pembroke since you can take make the maps disappear. I intend the historical layers to show the changing reality of space. Yet I worry the map layers may push back against my intentions. I want to show how task is part of landscape and always will be. I do not, then, want to make those layers - indicators of historical landscapes - disappear, effectively removing task from landscape. I can only do so much with my map, however. As Farman shows, maps are problematic and inherit a colonial history of controlling space. But they are also an incredibly affective and effective tool to present interesting and consumable history to a range of publics that understand space topographically. As Farman argues,
I believe that any level of interactivity that leads to social reform comes from a recontextualization of the existing master narratives – a refiguring that ultimately works to deconstruct the grounded signification demanded by any master narrative. Arguments which claim that interactivity and agency are impossible within Google Earth because Google provides the tools of interactivity go against our experience of navigating through everyday life and the authorial structures that bound us on every side. Despite the fact that boundaries exist according to authorial structures, we have the ability to ‘freely’ navigate the space and ultimately recontextualize the spaces that we inhabit. Navigating through an urban landscape is the perfect example: despite those in positions of authority placing streets in certain locations and stoplights that interrupt our journeys, we rarely feel that we have lost all agency. Instead, we feel the freedom to take a wide array of routes to our destination. Though we cannot go literally anywhere due to the structure and layout of streets and buildings, we do not feel that we have lost all power in relationship to the shape of our journey.[883]
Farman makes an incredibly important point about working within the limitations of open access. It is easy to critique digital projects and, specifically here, mapping software from a viewers perspective. And we should remain aware of their troubling histories. But this does not automatically disqualify their use in digital projects.
It appears that digital landscapes are not recreations of reality. Even if we sonify a map and create a multi-media experience, it will never be the experience of everyday reality. Whereas sound was once an experienced phenomenon engulfing reality, in a digital map it becomes merely a marker on a landscape. They are representations derived from algorithms so we must be aware of the algorithms involved. My map fails to produce sound in a way other than digital output, so sound is not felt and experienced as it is in person. However interactive the map may be, it lacks that bodily experience of sound as not only heard but felt through vibration in an environment akin to the way air encompasses you. You still experience a bodily effect changes, but I would argue they are minimal.
Landscapes of Meaning: MBIRA

It makes sense asking, then, what would a more embodied digital project look like? I explored several projects in the introduction that explore the relationship between sound and space. But only one project stands out for its embodied approach to sensory studies. Stuart Eve's work using mobile digital tools to experience historical landscapes is a solid example of embodied digital experiences. I initially attempted a similar project using MBIRA. MBIRA is developed by Matrix: The Center for Digital Humanities and Social Sciences at Michigan State University. It "is a platform to build, serve, and manage native and web-based mobile heritage experiences."1 I had considered MBIRA earlier but Ethan Watrall, one of Matrix's project leaders, warned me that the code currently only served Android devices and had no audio support.
I returned to the idea because I wanted to push my limits and create a mobile soundscape. I forked the MBIRA Android source code from Matrix's GitHub repository. I did not initially focus on audio. Instead, I attempted to add geotriggers to the template. I wanted to create an application that would trigger historical sounds when a user's smartphone was at a specific location. They would receive a push notification from the app when their phone entered a specified zone in Pembroke. When they opened the notification, they would be able to read about the industrial site to a clip of historical sounds.
But I was a bit too ambitious. The following is a Twitter conversation between myself, Watrall, and my supervisor, Dr. Graham.
hey @Matrix_MSU we have @BladesRob using @mbira_matrix for his public history major research project.— Shawn Graham (@electricarchaeo) September 24, 2015
@electricarchaeo @BladesRob wait…what? is he using the android template?— Ethan Watrall (@captain_primate) September 24, 2015
@captain_primate @electricarchaeo will be! Just got kora and mbira set up on my site— Rob (@BladesRob) September 24, 2015
@BladesRob @electricarchaeo please, please document your use…log bugs, etc on the GitHub page. If you are going to be doing any dev +— Ethan Watrall (@captain_primate) September 24, 2015
@captain_primate @BladesRob (this documentation can form a material part of your mre, by the way)— Shawn Graham (@electricarchaeo) September 24, 2015
@BladesRob @electricarchaeo …fork the GitHub repo. Would totally roll interesting work into the main branch (either plugin or template(s)— Ethan Watrall (@captain_primate) September 24, 2015
@BladesRob @electricarchaeo wow…ok…ambitious as hell. Android template won’t change in near future +— Ethan Watrall (@captain_primate) September 24, 2015
@BladesRob @electricarchaeo …its functional (ish)…but not feature complete. We’re building out the web template this semester (fyi)— Ethan Watrall (@captain_primate) September 24, 2015
@captain_primate @electricarchaeo I'll have to play with it then. At the very least I can get a blog post out of the experience!— Rob (@BladesRob) September 24, 2015
I attempted to work with unstable code under development. With MBIRA, I ran into what Farman calls the "empire of technological skill."[880] I had minimal experience developing Android Applications and became overwhelmed working with code that was itself still under development. Such is the peril of open access. We are forced to work within specific limitations, chief among them technical skill and time.
Mapping Memory

Maybe MBIRA would have been a more effective soundscapes project. I suspect being physically present on the landscape and hearing historical sounds would create a more affective and emotional experience. But MBIRA thus faces its own limitations. Not only must users have an Android device, but they must have location tracking turned on, and be physically present in Pembroke. When walking with MBIRA, you would also have to select the notification, open the app, and begin to read about the history of that site while receiving stimuli from daily elements from foot traffic to vehicles, wind, and more. Many of the sites are also no longer accessible. Admittedly, these limitations are not entirely negative. But MBIRA is not as conducive the the goal of my project to connect sound and memory. Sitting at a computer, focusing on my project - engaged in the map, its layers, the timlines, historical newspapers, photographs, and even the flow of the website - creates a more transduced experience for the triggered sound elements. My map is more conducive to the memory aspect of this project because of what several authors call the Proust effect. Marcel Proust was the French author of the series In Search of Lost Time. The series is a meditation on memory. Proust is well known for his literary comments on the relationship between memory and human senses. In his aptly title book The Proust Effect, Cretien Van Campen argues that the Proust effect is when sudden sensory stimuli invoke involuntary memories.[1] Cosana Eram similarly argues in her article "In Search of Lost Soundscapes" that "noises both separate and connect Marcel’s subjectivity to what he calls 'la vie extérieure.' Even a banal hissing of a pipe has a value in constructing and deconstructing memory in the text." For Proust, it is not the authenticity of sound that matters, nor how it is necessarily experienced in place. The most important aspect of sound is its sudden, unanticipated triggering of memory. that noise is like a parasite because of the way "noises are operators of irreversible time, the same lost time Proust laments, the time of nostalgia, entropy, and death."[Eram]
Proust writes that he is driven insane by the constant clamor of construction workers outside his house but Eram notes, "once these workers are gone after having become part of his routine noises, he would feel the ensuing silence as abnormal and would regret their ruckus as some sort of 'lullaby.'" That is the irony of the ubiquity of sound that Proust understands only when it is gone. Historians of sound have charged their discipline for its lack of focus on sound. After all, sound is ubiquitous and with our privilaging of visuality, it becomes mere background noise both physically and historiographically. But this argument is a blanket attack on the supposed triumph of visuality and observation in the Enlightenment. Proust comments on the connection between sound and memory by showing that sound is absolutely ubiquitous. Yet because something is ubiquitous does not mean it is ignored at all.
The thought remains, however: ultimately what is the goal of connecting memory and sound through digital soundscapes? Perhaps the most relevant critique comes from Jose Iges in his article "Soundscapes: A Historical Approach." With the recent growth of interest in how soundscapes can capture reality, Iges critiques our inability to 'recreate' soundscapes.
"By the trompe-l'oeil (deceive the eye) and, more importantly here, in our concern with sound, by the trompe-l'oreille which present us with a clichéd yet inconsistent image of the world. An image which serves as a description but is not operative, as it does not provide us with the tools to construct this world of reference. It is like memory: it allows us to remember and organise personal experiences, but not to live any similar experiences or those on which it draws."[Iges]
How, then, can a project like mine that provides a mere "inconsitent image of the world" be a serious reflective historical work? Iges continues his critique of 'recreating' of a soundscape.
[A]ll the authors of this genre present composed images, and ultimately use the sounds of the acoustic environment as the richest, most plural synthesiser possible. Even if they use complete, apparently unmanipulated sequences... the manipulation lies in the way the microphones are set up and specific venues chosen. In short, it is a kind of sound mirage: an acoustic image which may aim to represent the reality in question, while actually presenting a distorted reflection which, at best, captures the aroma of the original. Only by deliberately erasing the memory of that original can we embark on a composed soundscape with any probability of success. We could go as far as to say that in these works, memory appeals to forgetfulness to endow the work itself with aesthetic meaning. [Iges]
Iges argues that soundscapes appeal "to forgetfulness" because they are exclusively digital works of art. Soundscapes are entangled in their own history of technology and our ability to record audio. Therefore, there is no soundscape outside of recorded audio. This is the same point Ingold made in "Against Soundscape." Soundscapes "are the sum of multiple times which merge into just one... they also comprise multiple spaces." Soundscapes do not align at all with the phenomenology of experiencing sound. But this should not discourage researchers from reproducing soundscapes. Even Iges constructs a soundscape of Madrid through recordings. Rather, Iges is urging a very critical reflexivity for sound studies researchers that requires accepting the recordings and soundclips of our work as "merely anecdotes."
We must take Iges' critique seriously in tandem with Proust's comments on the function of sound in memory. Although we may experience certain sounds unanticipated in our daily lives, for the most part it has tragically fled our current reality. In Proust's final book, Time Regained, it dawns on him "that a work of art is the only means of regaining lost time."[Van Campen17]. Because soundscapes, however limiting, are affective works of art with the power to evoke sudden, involuntary memories. And through these involuntary memories, Proust argues, we evoke incredible aesthetic experiences.[16] Van Campen argues that by "delivering the sensory stimulus at unexpected moments, we can approach the Proust effect. I have used the Proust effect on my site by attaching sounds to images and other HTML elements that users trigger by hovering over them with their cursor. But not every element has a sound attached to it. Thus, by utilizing the silence of the web page, I make sound unexpected and, hopefully, trigger involuntary memories.
Our digital methods, then - augmented visuality, synchresis, transduction - require an ethics to public history since my map effects the way people remember. I have to be careful that my sounds will not be emotionally painful for my listeners. For sounds are not neutral and can trigger intense emotional memories. But I also cannot anticipate everything. As long as users understand the context of a soundscape project, they must make the decision to explore it. I must also realize that I am entangling memory and historical imagination with digital methods. I am not saying this is bad, nor am I championing digital methods. I merely want to show that the historian's ethic extends beyond a clearence form to conduct interviews. Our workflow, choice of sources, and research method must involve serious, ethical choices so that we may be sensitive to the history presented to the public.
I am changing the nature of memory. Moreover, I am making memory open to those who would have never had that memory otherwise. By sharing this history in a digital format, many people will begin to create memories of a place they may have never known. And it will be a digital genesis.
Footnotes

1